How do we make people more aware of their personal data?
We have two selves in the world at
any given time now.
We have the physical self,
our flesh and blood, our voice,
our presence in the world which
extends beyond our bodies but lives
in this physical space.
There's this other space,
we started calling cyberspace a long
time ago, but it's a real thing.
It's a data space.
We are as people quite often data
illiterate.
We don't realise the impact of what
data has on our lives,
we don't realise what we're giving
away and we don't realise the
mechanisms that will enable us to
re-empower ourselves in this
environment.
Security and privacy,
they are issues –people do care
about them and we need to,
we should address them.
I think unfortunately at the minute
we make people aware of their
personal data when terrible things
happen.
It's going to take personal
experiences of falling over,
some kind of truly horrific
experience before people actually
feel that they are compelled to be
educated about this.
And I think there's two pieces of
data.
People feel very strongly about,
one is health care and the other one
is banking.
So if you touch those two areas,
the reaction is extremely strong
because they feel that it sort of
touches something that they should
be in complete control of.
The Internet is manmade and
everything you put online is
recoverable.
There are world-class security experts,
but there are still people who are
stealing money from bank accounts.
As technologists we we have a duty
to try to explain these things to
people and to try to get across,
you know, find ways to make it real
and make it make sense and we need
more examples and better education.
We need to create a more informed
debate about data, especially the
value of data.
The value of data as individuals and
the value of data aggregated.
What are the disadvantages of managing your own data?
Right now there's more talk than
ever about owning your own data,
because there are so many companies
out there that are gathering data
about us, that we don't own at all,
that we don't control at all.
So if we're trying to manage your
own data, one of the problems with
this is you don't necessarily know
what data you're giving to other
people.
So lacking information and lacking
in any way of finding out that
information.
So I actually want it to be in the
hands of agencies that are going to
do good with that that can maybe use
my data in comparison to millions of
other people's data to find trends,
or to find specifics about me.
So yeah we needed it to be out there
in order to make it work,
and that's where the tension comes
in because as soon as I agree for it
to be out there, and allow it to be
worked on it's a bit like having a
house party when I was seventeen and said,
everybody's welcome.
Well they were until it got a bit
out of hand and you know with that
story goes.
I think that, I think that there are
very few people who are willing to
sacrifice as much as it would
actually take me to not be monitored
and surveilled at all.
What kind of help is available for people to manage their own data?
We need to move the debate beyond a
discussion about what it can be in a
commercial realm into activity in
the ordinary domestic role.
I think we should be educating
people about data through building
partnerships with the companies who
are involved in selling those
products.
I think we already have a middleman
for open data in an institution
that's been recently created the
Open Data Institute, co-founded by
Tim Berners-Lee and Gavin Starkson,
there's some fantastic people that
created an accreditation system.
What's going to happen in the long
run is that people will have control
over their personal data because
they'll know better what to do with
it and the tools will exist for them
to do more with it, with that data
than these other companies could.
It's just like it was with personal
computing.
and when you kind of mobilize a
world task force of paper geeks you
like making stuff.
I don't think we need technology
businesses to sit there and vouch
for people's data.
That seems to me an old way of doing things,
I think an open source approach with
five-star accreditation from the ODI
seems a good way forward.
The trap not to fall into is the
trap of fear right now,
and we're at a high point of fear
thanks to Edward Snowden,
thanks to discovering what the NSA
and the US has been doing,
and what GCHQ here has been doing.
If you can build a sneaky feature
into a device, and you decide not to
tell the user you decide to kind of
break the law a bit, certainly in
data protection terms,
theres a real risk that it will get
found out.
This is a power we can use for good
or evil and probably both,
but we, it's present in the world
now and we have to figure out how to
use it.